---
anchor_id: cv-tips
title: Tips on writing a technical CV
layout: blog_post
---

In the last few years I've been more involved in recruitment and seeing a lot of
CVs for developer roles has given me some thoughts on what makes a good
technical CV. Here are some tips to improve yours.

## Make it relevant!

What I want to know when looking at a CV is whether you have the skills I'm
looking for, and if not, whether you show the potential to gain them. I want to
know what technologies and practices you know, and what you are doing at the
moment. Ideally I'd like the two to be related – if I'm hiring for a Ruby
developer (we're not at GDS, [we want good developers of any
discipline](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/jobs/)) I want to know if you are going to
hit the ground running.

So when you are describing your current or recent roles, make sure you highlight
the things you are doing that are relevant to the job that you are trying to get.
For example if the job spec asks for experience of leading a team, then make
sure there is evidence for this in the description of what you've been working
on. Use your cover letter or [statement of
suitability](https://gdstechnology.blog.gov.uk/2013/12/24/applying-for-a-job-at-gds/) to draw attention to these
areas. Make it easy for the hiring manager to see that you tick all the right
boxes.

Together a CV and covering letter should leave no doubt that you know what is
wanted and that you can provide it.

## Address gaps and concerns

When you are reading a CV you notice gaps and short jobs, particularly recently.
The good CVs are ones that address these rather than brushing over it. For
example, one CV I saw, their most recent employment was two years ago. Had they
been unemployed since then? No – they had taken some time out to raise a family.
Another one had only been in their present job for three months. Why were they
leaving so soon? They covered this in their letter – unfortunately the company
was changing direction due to cash-flow problems. That's fine – some of the best
people get made redundant. But if you don't explain, it invites the reader to
wonder if you failed your probation, or if you changed your mind about working
there and might change your mind about working here.

View anything like that through the eyes of the recruiter and offer an
explanation, rather than attempting to gloss over it.

It's also worth addressing any gaps in the required skills. In the example
above, if you can't provide evidence of team-leading from work, can you give
other evidence, for example from captaining a sports team or running a Brownie
pack?

## Do what they asked for

Make sure you supply the requested information. In my case, I was reviewing CVs
for a job as a developer at GDS. Our process has now changed but at the time
our job adverts said that in order to apply, you need to send "a CV, a
CV cover letter, and a written statement of suitability explaining how you meet
all of the competencies and specialist skills required".

A very large number of candidates do not include a written statement of
suitability. This is an unusual requirement, but in the civil service it is [an
extremely important
one](https://gdstechnology.blog.gov.uk/2013/12/24/applying-for-a-job-at-gds/)
because if you do not demonstrate evidence of the civil service competencies at
some point in the process, we are *not allowed* to employ you.

OK, so this may not seem very relevant if you're not thinking of applying to the
civil service any time soon. But it is. As a developer, you want to demonstrate
that you are able to understand users' requirements, and a good place to start
is with what they actually ask for.

## Sell yourself

Essentially that's what your CV is: a document for selling your skills. So make
sure it does that. Say what you have done. Don't say "I was asked to..." or "My
team were given the task of..." Instead, make it clear that you actively seek
out and take opportunities, rather than just being handed them.

It can be quite hard, as many of us are naturally quite modest, but it's good to
make it clear that you are a self-starter. It's also worth phrasing things to
show what your contribution to a team's achievements were. I am interested in
what your team achieved, but I am not hiring your team, I'm hiring you, and I
want to know what you did to help the team reach those goals.

## A profile can be useful

One thing that I find quite useful when looking at CVs is a profile at the top.
Just a couple of lines that sum up your current role and what you're looking for.
It's not essential, but it gives me an overview of what I'm going to read below
and whether this person is likely to be a good fit for the role.

## You don't have to say everything!

I don't really need to read four pages listing every job you've had since 1999. What
I'm interested in is what you can do now. I want the current/most recent job,
maybe the one or two before that if you've not been at your current place for
very long, and if you do a lot of short contract work then
maybe a bit more. And then summarise the rest – you just want to show a natural progression.

Similarly, very long lists of technologies are not that useful, particularly if
they include things like SVN, Eclipse and Unix. If you are sending your CV to be
included in a searchable database, for example for a recruitment consultancy,
these will help, but if you are applying for a specific job, it is better to
focus on the skills being asked for.

If you've worked on a full-stack project, you will have come into contact with a
lot of technologies, and if you're a good developer I don't doubt you can pick
up ones you don't know quickly. Just concentrate on proving to me that you're a
good developer.

## Context is useful

What shape has your experience been? A line summarising what a company's
business is and roughly how big it is is useful. Job titles in tech are very
fluid and something like "senior developer" doesn't mean the same thing [from
place to
place](http://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2014/aug/28/what-does-it-mean-to-be-a-senior-developer).
If you tell me how big the dev team is, then that gives me a bit of context.

And give details. Examples are good. You were a Linux admin; how many servers did
you manage? Even better is examples of particular things you did. Don't just say
"I improved performance", say "the site was experiencing extensive load
spikes and I was able to diagnose the cause as X and implement solution Y which
led to a reduction of Z%".

## Spend time on the layout

Yes, I know, you're a developer not a designer. But get a designer to look over
it if you can. Grey text, a lot of bold, tiny text – these all make it harder to
read. When recruiting for the civil service we read each CV closely even if it
is hard to do so, but in the private sector if your CV is too hard to read that
might be enough for it to be rejected.

And be aware that it might be printed out.

## A word on age

How old you are is irrelevant to how well you can do the job, and since the 2010
Equality Act it is [illegal for employers to discriminate on grounds of
age](http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1841).
So there is no need to include that extraneous information in your CV. Don't
include your birthdate. You don't even need to include dates of your formal
educational qualifications which would allow people to guess your age. And
adjectives like "young" to describe yourself are also odd – you are inviting
the recruiter to discriminate. Don't do it.

## In summary: make it easy for them to pick you!

It is much more cost-effective to rule people out at the CV stage than at the
interview stage. It will probably take around 20 minutes for one person to look
closely at your CV. But if you are invited in for interview, that's a lot of
extra investment of time on the part of the company.

Because we have a fair process in the civil service, you can be sure your CV
will be properly reviewed. But the private sector is not bound by such rules. If
your application is not great, it's a much harder sell for the company to make
the investment in interviewing you.

Essentially, you want to make it easy for whoever is in charge of hiring to
choose your CV, because your CV is so obviously relevant to the role they are
hiring for. This does mean that you have to revise your CV and cover letter for
every job you apply for, but you should be used to that. You're a good
developer, so you are already prepared to [do the hard work to make it
simple](https://www.gov.uk/design-principles#fourth). Right?
